---
layout: post_page
lang: en
ref: repo
post_url: mpc
title: Model Preview Control
permalink: en/git-repository/mpc
---

This is library has been developed to answer to the model preview control problem.
It solves discrete systems using a QP solver. 
The library has been design to be fast and user-friendly. 
Python bindings are also provided. 

It is also my first big library. 
In this article i will describe to what a mpc is made for, why you should use it and how.
<!--more-->

# So, what is a MPC?
MPC stands for Model Preview Control.
It is used to solve a problem in a horizon of time by minimizing a cost function.
Be aware that the library here is made to solve Linear Time Invariant (LTI) discrete systems.
This means that the behavior of the system does not change through time.

## Continuous system
Generally, all start with a beautiful continuous system.
Unfortunately, most of the time it is hard to find a viable analytical solution over time.
But it is possible to perform a discretization of the system, and this system, can be solved by the MPC.

First, let's see what kind of system can work. Any system of the form

$$ \mathbf{\dot{s}} = A\_c\mathbf{s} + B\_c\mathbf{u} + \mathbf{d}\_c $$

is a candidate. \\(\mathbf{s}\\) is the state vector of the system and \\(\mathbf{u}\\) is the control vector.
After discretization with a time step \\(T\\), the system becomes:

$$ \mathbf{s}\_{k+1} = A\mathbf{s}\_k + B\mathbf{u}\_k + \mathbf{d} $$

where \\(A\\), \\(B\\) and \\(\mathbf{d}\\) are respectively the state matrix, the control matrix and the bias vector. To understand more about how to get the discretized system, [Wikipedia is your friend](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discretization)

## How the horizon is computed

To show how the MPC finds out the solution, we need to develop the equation above.
We need first to perform a recurrence and this what comes out at a step \\(k\\).

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \mathbf{x}\_1 & = & A\mathbf{x}\_0 + B\mathbf{u}\_0 + \mathbf{d} \\\\
    \mathbf{x}\_2 & = & A\mathbf{x}\_1 + B\mathbf{u}\_1 + \mathbf{d} \\\\
                  & = & A(A\mathbf{x}\_0 + B\mathbf{u}\_0 + \mathbf{d}) + B\mathbf{u}\_1 + \mathbf{d} \\\\
                  & = & A^2\mathbf{x}\_0 + [AB\ B][\mathbf{u}^T\_0\ \mathbf{u}^T\_1]^T + A\mathbf{d} + \mathbf{d} \\\\
    \mathbf{x}\_3 & = & A\mathbf{x}\_2 + B\mathbf{u}\_2 + \mathbf{d} \\\\
                  & = & A(A^2\mathbf{x}\_0 + [AB\ B][\mathbf{u}^T\_0\ \mathbf{u}^T\_1]^T + A\mathbf{d} + \mathbf{d}) + B\mathbf{u}\_1 + \mathbf{d} \\\\
                  & = & A^3\mathbf{x}\_0 + [A^2B\ AB\ B][\mathbf{u}^T\_0\ \mathbf{u}^T\_1\ \mathbf{u}^T\_2]^T + A^2\mathbf{d} + A\mathbf{d} + \mathbf{d}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

It is then easy to show that the recurrence of \\(N\\) steps can be written:

$$ \mathbf{X}\_N = \Phi\mathbf{x}\_0 + \Psi\mathbf{U}\_{N-1} + \mathbf{\xi} $$

where we have

$$
\Phi = \left[
    \begin{array}{c}
        I \\\\
        A \\\\
        A^2 \\\\
        \vdots \\\\
        A^N
    \end{array}
    \right],
\ \Psi = \left[
    \begin{array}{cccc}
        0        & 0        & \cdots & 0 \\\\
        B        & 0        & \cdots & 0 \\\\
        AB       & B        & \ddots & \vdots \\\\
        \vdots   & \vdots   & \ddots & 0 \\\\
        A^{N-1}B & A^{N-2}B & \cdots & B
    \end{array}
    \right],
\ \mathbf{\xi} = \left[
    \begin{array}{c}
        \mathbf{0} \\\\
        \mathbf{d} \\\\
        A\mathbf{d} + \mathbf{d} \\\\
        \vdots \\\\
        \sum\_{i=0}^{N-1} A^{i}\mathbf{d}
    \end{array}
    \right]
$$

and the whole-state vector \\(\mathbf{X}\\) and whole-control vector \\(\mathbf{U}\\) are

$$
\mathbf{X} = \left[
    \begin{array}{c}
        \mathbf{x}\_0 \\\\
        \mathbf{x}\_1 \\\\
        \vdots \\\\
        \mathbf{x}\_N
    \end{array}
    \right],
\ \mathbf{U} = \left[
    \begin{array}{c}
        \mathbf{u}\_0 \\\\
        \mathbf{u}\_1 \\\\
        \vdots \\\\
        \mathbf{u}\_{N-1}
    \end{array}
    \right].
$$

Finally, given a desired target/trajectory \\(\mathbf{X}\_T\\) we compute the horizon using a QP solver with the following cost function

$$
(\mathbf{X} - \mathbf{X}\_T)^TW_X(\mathbf{X} - \mathbf{X}\_T) + \mathbf{U}^TW\_U\mathbf{U}
$$

# Let's dive into the library
The definition of the matrices above is really important to have a proper use of the library.
The library has been developed using c++14 tools and it uses [eigen matrix library](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org) internally.
Later, i will call step-matrix (resp. step-vector), a matrix (resp. vectors) that has the dimension of one step (same dimension as \\(\mathbf{x}_k\\))
and whole-matrix (resp. whole-vector), a matrix (resp. vector) that has the full dimension (same dimension as \\(\mathbf{X}\\)).

## The system
The system is written in the `PreviewSystem.h` file.
It defines the whole system and creates the \\(\Phi\\), \\(\Psi\\) and \\(\mathbf{\xi}\\) matrices and vector.
It is better to create a shared pointer of the instance.

```c++
auto ps = std::make_shared<mpc::PreviewSystem>();
// Initialize the system
ps->system(A, B, d, x_0, x_traj, nrStep);
```

## The mpc
The mpc is written in the `previewController.h` file.
There are two version of it.
The `MPCTypeFull` and the  `MPCTypeLast`. 
In the case you want the mpc to find a solution around a trajectory, you must choose the former one. 
If you only want to target a final point, both can be used.
The difference is in the construction of the cost function. 
While the `MPCTypeFull` is using the matrices and vectors \\(\Phi\\), \\(\Psi\\), \\(\mathbf{\xi}\\) and \\(\mathbf{X}\_T\\), the `MPCTypeLast` is only using the bottom part of those (and thus only the last point of the trajectory is searched).

Creating an instance of an mpc is fairly easy.

```c++
mpc::MPCTypeFull controller(ps);
// Build the system and solve the mpc
controller.solve();
```

It is also possible to (re)initialize the system used by the mpc.

```c++
mpc::MPCTypeFull controller();
// (Re)initialize the mpc with the new system
controller.initializeController(ps);
```

## The constraints
The library provides several types of constraints, let's see what we can do.
All the constraints can be created using with step-matrix or whole-matrix.
We will see that a mixed of the two is also possible.
They also need to be wrapped in a shared pointer in order to pass them to the mpc.

### Trajectory Constraints
We distinguish two types of trajectory constraints: The trajectory constraint \\(E\mathbf{X} \leq \mathbf{f}\\) or \\(E\mathbf{X} = \mathbf{f}\\)
and the trajectory bound constraint \\(\underline{\mathbf{X}} \leq \mathbf{X} \leq \overline{\mathbf{X}}\\).
Note that the latter can be rewritten to produce the former.

```c++
// Create an inequality constraint
// E is step-matrix or whole-matrix, f is step-vector or whole-vector.
auto ineqTrajConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::TrajectoryConstraint>(E, f);
// Create an equality constraint
auto eqTrajConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::TrajectoryConstraint>(E, f, false);
// Create a bound constraint
// lower and upper are step-vector or whole-vector
auto boundTrajConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::TrajectoryBoundConstraint>(lower, upper);
```

### Control Constraints
This is pretty much the same idea as above, there is two type: The control constraint \\(G\mathbf{U} \leq \mathbf{f}\\) or \\(G\mathbf{U} = \mathbf{f}\\)
and the control bound constraint \\(\underline{\mathbf{U}} \leq \mathbf{U} \leq \overline{\mathbf{U}}\\).

```c++
// Create an inequality constraint
// G is step-matrix or whole-matrix, f is step-vector or whole-vector.
auto ineqControlConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::ControlConstraint>(E, f);
// Create an equality constraint
auto eqControlConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::ControlConstraint>(E, f, false);
// Create a bound constraint
// lower and upper are step-vector or whole-vector
auto boundControlConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::ControlBoundConstraint>(lower, upper);
```

### Mixed Constraints
Mixed constraints allow you to add constraints that involves both the trajectory and the control.
It is written as \\(E\mathbf{X} + G\mathbf{U} \leq \mathbf{f}\\) or \\(E\mathbf{X} + G\mathbf{U} = \mathbf{f}\\).
As always:

```c++
// Create an inequality constraint
// E is step-matrix or whole-matrix,  G is step-matrix or whole-matrix, f is step-vector or whole-vector.
auto ineqMixedConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::MixedConstraint>(E, f);
// Create an equality constraint
auto eqMixedConstr = std::make_shared<mpc::MixedConstraint>(E, f, false);
```

### Adding and updating a constraint
All that needs to be done is to make the mpc aware of the constraints.
It will update the constraints when its solve function is called.

```c++
// Adding an inequality control constraint
controller.addConstraint(ineqControlConstr);
```

### Constraint removal
There are two ways of deleting a constraint from the mpc.
The main and recommended way to do so, is to let the mpc handles it.
In the `solve` function and at the end, the mpc instance checks whether or not a constraint needs to be deleted.
A constraint is deleted if the user (you) has deleted his shared pointer of the constraint.
If you keep a shared pointer of the constraint alive, the constraint remains in the mpc.
Another is to call the function `Needs to be reimplemented`

### The autoSpan function
The `autoSpan` function is present in all constraints.
This method needs to be called if you have created a constraint with step-matrix and whole-matrix.
For example, if you have a constant matrix \\(G\\) (so same matrix for one step) for the control constraint and
a whole-vector \\(\mathbf{f}\\) (so for the full horizon), you can pass the two matrices to the constraint and then call the autoSpan function.

## Changing the QP solver
Depending on your compilation state, for now, 4 QP solvers are used.
You can change at anytime the QP to use for solving the your problem.
The current available QP are:
 * QuadProg (Default one)
 * QLD
 * Gurobi
 * LSSOL (need commercial license)
To change the QP:

```c++
// Create an instance of a mpc with a different QP
mpc::MPCTypeFull controller(mpc::SolverFlag::QLD)
// Adding an inequality control constraint
controller.selectQPSolver(mpc::SolverFlag::GUROBIDense)
```

## Python users
Python users can use all the library, the same way as C++ users.
There are some change though.
As a shared pointer of constraints and preview system are needed a specific function has been developed.
Python users need to call the function is `New` in front.
For example, `PreviewSystem` becomes `NewPreviewSystem`.

## Improving performance and building time
First, you can measure building and solving time of the mpc using `buildTime` and `solveAndBuildTime` functions.


### Prefer MPCTypeLast over MPCTypeFull for single target

### Updating the system yourself

### Give rvalue to the constraints

### Privilege step-matrix and step-vector
